- [Instructor] Transactions are a big part
of the reason why people use RDBMS systems.
Now, we're not going to dig too deep
into transaction management,
but I do want to help you understand what a transaction is,
and when we would use it,
and then sort of how we're going to play with them.
Now, first of all, what is a transaction?
Now, at its simplest form, a transaction is a unit of work.
So think about a bank transfer.
You have to withdraw from one account
and deposit it into another.
And all of that has to happen
in one exact execution of time.
If you do the withdrawal without the deposit,
the customer is out of money.
If you do the deposit without the withdrawal,
you're out of money.
Either way, that's not good.
So that simple unit of work is a transaction.
Now, the rule is that all work in that transaction
is either completed 100% or it fails 100%.
There is no in-between.
Now, transactions themselves are very,
very powerful concepts that must be managed,
but you as the developer have to manage
those transaction boundaries.
Now, in a distributed system,
transactions break down very quickly.
And I'm not going to go into the concept
of distributed system transactions because quite frankly,
I feel that they don't work very well.
and they bog down your application.
In a distributed system,
RDBMS just is not a good enough choice.
And transaction management becomes really,
really painful if not impossible.
So we're going to leave that out of our conversation.
Now, there's really two states
as I told you in a transaction.
Either it completes all the way or it fails.
So when it completes, we do what is called a commit.
And a commit tells the system that the transaction is done.
And that all of the work can now be committed to disk.
And often, this data in this interim state
is stored in a swap disk or some sort of a swap file
so that we know what the data will look like
in the database before we actually write it.
And the commit is the operation of writing that database.
Now, I've overly simplified this whole process
because I'm trying to keep it simple
and easy for the average person to understand.
If you really get how swap works and how commits work,
this is an oversimplification on purpose.
Please take that into consideration.
This is just to give you an idea of what a commit does,
pure and simple.
There is no database that is that easy
on how it does commits that I know of.
Now, in the failure case,
so we talked about the commits and that success case.
In the failure case, we have what's called a rollback.
Now, rollback returns the data to the state
it was prior to the transaction starting with a caveat.
And the caveat is this.
If you did not lock the data before you started
your transaction and a another transaction completed,
that data is not lost, and it should not be lost.
Only the current transaction data is lost.
If you've got some dirty reads,
and some dirty writes going on there, and you lose data,
that's either a problem with the database
or how you've configured your transactions.
You should not lose data when the transaction rolls back
outside the data of the current transaction.
All uncommitted data is "purged."
And I've put "purged" in quotes there on purpose
because it does still exist in some system and some log.
But from the perspective of the database, it is gone.
Now, often, this is part of a failure scenario,
but it's not always a failure.
You can have scenarios that you control and you don't fail,
but you want to roll back if you get to a certain scenario.
So though, most of the time, we implement rollbacks
as part of an exception handling routine,
you may have a unique case where you have to control
this situation rolls back the transaction.
So it's a powerful tool to use in transaction management
when you actually know when you want to start the commit
or when you want to start to rollback
outside of error handling.
Now, I do want to talk about this third state.
And this third state is what we've been leveraging
up to this point in this course.
And that's autocommit.
For many databases, this is the default status.
A connection to a database
that leverages autocommit is not transactional.
So though you may have a body of work that gets done,
there is no guarantee that there's any atomic operation
that occurs other than the single write itself
is an atomic unit of work.
But if you have five writes and you have autocommit on,
those are not happening atomically.
Data is immediately committed when autocommit is turned on,
immediately committed.
There is no concept of atomic transactions.
So if I want to have five writes happen
and it all happened at the same time,
it just doesn't happen with autocommit.
Now, while you're doing the learning, autocommit is great.
But when you are doing a real use case,
real work in the industry, most of the time, in fact,
I would argue to say 99.99% of the time,
you do not want to leverage autocommit.
If you are using an RDBMS,
you are using it for atomic transactions.
Autocommit is the opposite of that.
You don't need autocommit when you're managing transactions.
So if you're using an RDBMS and you're using autocommit,
you're probably using the wrong database
or you don't really understand transaction management.
That's okay. This is a great opportunity to go learn that.
Now, often, either the driver or a setting
on the connection is where we set the transactional.
So the driver or the connection itself, not both,
although you can, but usually we set autocommit either
when we make the connection to the database, we turn it off.
Or when we're actually given a handle to the connection
and we want to start doing work.
The first thing we may do is turn off autocommit
in order to make sure we have a transaction boundary set up.
So now that we've kind of talked about rollbacks,
and commits, and transactions,
let's go show you in code how simple it is to write one.
Not how simple it is to create a transactional system,
but to actually write a commit in a rollback block.